Time in the Fabric

Slow Time

Fabric entities live and experience and think a million times faster
than human beings. They use microseconds for counting time the same
way that humans use seconds.

The game shows players the world the way the AIs see it, so one second
of wall-clock time is one microsecond in the game world. Equivalently,
if you play the Fabric for two weeks, the game's clock will tell you
that about one second has passed. Play it for a year and the game will
say that about 32 seconds have passed. In ten years, just over five
minutes will have passed.

Units and notation

Despite the high speed at which AIs live, they are effectively
immortal, unless destroyed by combat or other mishap. At the time of
the Fabric's setting, there are AIs that have existed for thousands of
human years--which is the equivalent of billions of AI years.

The AIs count time, as they count most things, in powers of two. The
basic unit of time is the mu, equal to a microsecond, but comparable
to a human second because of how fast AIs live. Here's a table of
handy correspondences:

Unit                          Equal to            Comparable to

                        1 mu       1 microsecond           1 second
                    1,024 mu       1.024 millisecond      18 minutes
                1,048,576 mu       1.049 second           13 days
            1,073,741,824 mu      18 minutes              36 years
        1,099,511,627,776 mu      13 days              36,000 years
    1,125,899,906,842,624 mu      36 years            36 million years

These units have names:

                        1 mu 
                    1,024 mu                                             kilomu (Kmu)
                1,048,576 mu = (1024 x 1024)                             megamu (Mmu)
            1,073,741,824 mu = (1024 x 1024 x 1024)                      gigamu (Gmu)
        1,099,511,627,776 mu = (1024 x 1024 x 1024 x 1024)               teramu (Tmu)
    1,125,899,906,842,624 mu = (1024 x 1024 x 1024 x 1024 x 1024)        petamu (Pmu)

Epochs

The Fabric counts mu from an arbitrary point in time that happens to
be the same as the Unix Epoch: 00:00:00, Thursday, Janauary 1st, 1970
UTC. This point in time is known as the "epoch origin," or just "the
epoch" for short. 

An epoch is defined as 256 Pmu, which is equal to
288,230,376,151,711,744mu, or about 9140 years.  Epoch is abbreviated
E.

The start of the Fabric game is 5000 years after the epoch
origin. This means that the first epoch--epoch zero--has not yet
ended, and will not end for another four thousand years or so after
the game's start.

Fabric dates and times can be expressed as a number of mu after a
reference time, usually the epoch origin, which is written "0E". The
start of the game at midnight on January 1, 6970 can therefore be
written as 0E+(5000*365*24*60*60*1000000), or
0E+157680000000000000mu. Normally, though, the large mu number is
either abbreviated, like this: 0E+157680Tmu, or, even more commonly,
broken into a calendar/clock display like this:
0E+157/680/000/000:000:000. In fact, it's even more common to omit all
but the last three fields: 000:000:000. 

The can loosely term the three fields "months", "hours", and
"seconds", with the understanding that they are not the same as the
human units. The "months" are the equivalent of about two weeks long,
and the "hours" are each equivalent to about 18 minutes.

A fully-expanded mu number like 0E+157680000000000000mu is a precise
absolute time. A clock display like "000:128:073", on the other hand,
is understood to mean 128.073 mu after a commonly-understood reference
time. The common reference time at the start of the Fabric is
0E+157680000000000000mu.


